It had seemed to me deplorable that a great scholar and a fine
poet should write like this, and, finding myself next to him in
Hall a few weeks later, I plunged in and said so. Did he really
mean what he had said to be taken very seriously? Would the life
of the best of critics really have seemed to him comparable with
that of a scholar and a poet? We argued the questions all through
dinner, and I think that finally he agreed with me. I must not seem
to claim a dialectical triumph over a man who can no longer
contradict me, but ‘Perhaps not entirely’ was, in the end, his reply
to the first question, and ‘Probably no’ to the second.
   There may have been some doubt about Housman's feelings,
and I do not wish to claim him as on my side; but there is no
doubt at all about the feelings of men of science, and I share them
fully. If then I find myself writing, not mathematics, but ‘about’
mathematics, it is a confession of weakness, for which I may
rightly be scorned or pitied by younger and more vigorous
mathematicians. I write about mathematics because, like any
other mathematician who has passed sixty, I have no longer the
freshness of mind, the energy, or the patience to carry on
effectively with my proper job.
   I propose to put forward an apology for mathematics; and I may
be told that it needs none, since there are now few studies more
generally recognized, for good reasons or bad, as profitable and
praiseworthy. This may be true: indeed it is probable, since the
sensational triumphs of Einstein, that stellar astronomy and
atomic physics are the only sciences which stand higher in
popular estimation. A mathematician need not now consider
himself on the defensive. He does not have to meet the sort of
opposition describe by Bradley in the admirable defence of
metaphysics which forms the introduction to Appearance and
Reality.
    A metaphysician, says Bradley, will be told that ‘metaphysical
knowledge is wholly impossible’, or that ‘even if possible to a
certain degree, it is practically no knowledge worth the name’.
‘The same problems,’ he will hear, ‘the same disputes, the same
sheer failure. Why not abandon it and come out? Is there nothing
else worth your labour?’ There is no one so stupid as to use this
sort of language about mathematics. The mass of mathematical
truth is obvious and imposing; its practical applications, the
bridges and steam-engines and dynamos, obtrude themselves on
the dullest imagination. The public does not need to be convinced
that there is something in mathematics.
    All this is in its way very comforting to mathematicians, but it
is hardly possible for a genuine mathematician to be content with
it. Any genuine mathematician must feel that it is not on these
crude achievements that the real case for mathematics rests, that
the popular reputation of mathematics is based largely on
ignorance and confusion, and there is room for a more rational
defence. At any rate, I am disposed to try to make one. It should
be a simpler task than Bradley’s difficult apology.
    I shall ask, then, why is it really worth while to make a serious
study of mathematics? What is the proper justification of a
mathematician’s life? And my answers will be, for the most part,
such as are expected from a mathematician: I think that it is worth
while, that there is ample justification. But I should say at once
that my defence of mathematics will be a defence of myself, and
that my apology is bound to be to some extent egotistical. I
should not think it worth while to apologize for my subject if I
regarded myself as one of its failures.
    Some egotism of this sort is inevitable, and I do not feel that it
really needs justification. Good work is no done by ‘humble’
men. It is one of the first duties of a professor, for example, in
any subject, to exaggerate a little both the importance of his
subject and his own importance in it. A man who is always asking
‘Is what I do worth while?’ and ‘Am I the right person to do it?’
will always be ineffective himself and a discouragement to
others. He must shut his eyes a little and think a little more of his
subject and himself than they deserve. This is not too difficult: it
is harder not to make his subject and himself ridiculous by
shutting his eyes too tightly.
A man who sets out to justify his existence and his activities has
to distinguish two different questions. The first is whether the
work which he does is worth doing; and the second is why he
does it, whatever its value may be. The first question is often very
difficult, and the answer very discouraging, but most people will
find the second easy enough even then. Their answers, if they are
honest, will usually take one or other of two forms; and the
second form is a merely a humbler variation of the first, which is
the only answer we need consider seriously.
    (1) ‘I do what I do because it is the one and only thing that I
can do at all well. I am a lawyer, or a stockbroker, or a profes-
sional cricketer, because I have some real talent for that particular
job. I am a lawyer because I have a fluent tongue, and am
interested in legal subtleties; I am a stockbroker because my
judgment of the markets is quick and sound; I am a professional
cricketer because I can bat unusually well. I agree that it might be
better to be a poet or a mathematician, but unfortunately I have no
talent for such pursuits.’
    I am not suggesting that this is a defence which can be made
by most people, since most people can do nothing at all well. But
it is impregnable when it can be made without absurdity, as it can
by a substantial minority: perhaps five or even ten percent of men
can do something rather well. It is a tiny minority who can do
something really well, and the number of men who can do two
things well is negligible. If a man has any genuine talent he

